+++
categories = []
date = "2015-02-11T18:03:18+01:00"
showDate = false
description = ""
keywords = []
title = "Why exploding job offers don't work for senior hires"
coverImage = "/img/explosion.jpg"
coverSize = "partial"
coverMeta = "out"
thumbnailImagePosition = "right"

+++

At the moment -- and for the foreseeable future -- the power balance of hiring
negotiations favours the engineering candidates rather than with the hiring
company. One consequence of this is that any attempt to hurry, strong-arm, or
manipulate candidates will likely be ineffective, and could potentially
backfire horribly.

This is how I became one such backfire.

<!--more-->

## The offer

I had been lucky enough to receive an offer to join Widget Co. as an
engineering lead.

The terms were all as expected: standard four year option vesting schedule,
solid salary, health insurance, a slew of intangible benefits rendered tangible
in the paperwork.

All as-expected apart from one thing:

The in-house recruiter said I had to give them an answer **by the end of the
week**.

This took me by surprise: it hadn't been the approach taken by any of the other
people I was speaking to, and I happened to still be at an earlier stage in the
hiring process with some other companies. I was effectively being asked to stop
my job search then and there, with incomplete information, and commit to one
option when others were still open to me.

## The crux

I explained my reservations about this demand to the recruiter, and the
deadline was relaxed until the beginning of the following week, which I
appreciated but it was still nowhere near enough time to finish up the other
conversations that I was enjoying elsewhere.

I agonised over what to do that weekend, and on Monday -- still not feeling
equipped with all the information I needed to make such a big decision -- **I
accepted the exploding job offer**.

In my head, I was a "definitely probably" on the offer. I really liked Widget
Co., the people, and the space they were working in. My "definitely probably"
became a forced dichotomy, and I certainly didn't want to say "definitely not",
so…

## The excitement

_Welcome to the team!_ notices were sent out to the whole startup. Long chains
of messages flooded back from the engineering team, punctuated with the
GIFs-du-jour and meadows of golden emoji. The people I'd interviewed with sent
personal notes saying they were looking forward to what we were going to create
together.

For my part, I was excited too! The warm welcome was overwhelming and redoubled
my confidence that this would be a great move.

## However…

Redoubled confidence &ne; absolute certainty.

There was one company I was still talking to, and I was getting more and more
excited by what they were trying to do, and with the monumental vision of the
founders.

As you can probably guess, I eventually decided that this other company --
[Teespring](https://teespring.com) -- was the right option, and I had to
retract my acceptance of the first offer.

I felt awful -- especially due to the impact on the team -- but also that I'd
been backed into a corner by the recruiter.

## Summary

It is _incredibly_ frustrating when candidates whom you're excited to work with
decide to go in a different direction (I know, I've been on the receiving end
enough times!).

Widget Co. knew they were not in a strong negotiating position, and attempted
to leverage my fear of missing out on their great opportunity to force me to
relinquish the chance of finding _other_ great opportunities.

In the end, not only did Widget Co.'s aggressive tactic tarnish my impression
of them at the crucial moment, it also meant the entire team got to see the
whole flip-flopping drama play out.

My suggestion -- and the approach I take whenever making offers -- is to labour
the point that we want the candidate to have all the information they need
before making the right decision for them. If the candidate feels rushed, they
might get spooked and pull away. Or even worse: buckle to your pressure, accept
the offer, then quit after three months because they were never truly engaged!
